# Creating implicit task-sets from categorical stimuli: when structure learning degrades incidental memory

Adaptive behavior is facilitated by our ability to discover and leverage rules for classifying stimuli and linking them to appropriate actions. Previous studies have shown that when humans learn stimulus-response associations for two-dimensional stimuli, they implicitly form and generalize abstract rule structures. Here, we manipulated how trial-unique images from stimulus categories mapped onto responses to bias spontaneous task-set formation and investigate the effects of structure learning on incidental stimulus encoding. Across four experiments, subjects performed a learning task that allowed for clustering of stimulus-action rules according to stimulus dimensions (e.g., age/gender). For “non-clustered” learners, the category-response mapping was arbitrary; for “clustered” learners, the mapping was clustered according to a higher-level dimension (e.g., gender). During structure learning, subjects could attend more to stimulus features, resulting in better subsequent memory. Alternately, generating and testing rules to learn appropriate task-sets might impose inordinate demands on working memory, diverting attention away from stimulus encoding. We found that all learners generate clustered task-sets for grouping trial-unique stimuli into categories and that this tendency is robustly enhanced when stimulus-response mappings encourage dimensional grouping. However, consistent with higher demands on working memory, implicit structure learning comes with a cost: the early phase of spontaneous task-set formation is associated with diminished task stimulus encoding. Larger implicit switch costs meant worse incidental encoding for images encoded earlier. This effect occurred only when images were task-relevant, regardless of whether task-sets were implicitly discovered or explicitly instructed. Structure learning promotes cognitive flexibility but can also impair incidental memory, suggesting a mechanism by which multi-tasking results in poorer behavioral outcomes.
